---
title: "On the Origins of Trust"
description: "What implications can we identify about ourselves and socieity by examining the origins of trust?"
layout: post
toc: false
comments: true
hide: false
search_exclude: true
categories: []
metadata_key1: metadata_value1
metadata_key2: metadata_value2
---
While it's human nature to seek explanations about the world around us, we simply don't have the time and resources to become experts and think through to our own conclusions from scratch. As a result, we source information through our social groups and consumer media to help us understand our surrounding world. While we may understand the compromise on accuracy when moving to the consumption of perspectives, we hope to have the intellectual capacity to identify more accurate perspectives over others. In effect we should be able to navigate through the complicated mess of available opinions and emerge with similar perspectives had we done so by our own efforts. Yet if our trust in a chosen perspective does not rely upon the underlying fundamentals of a topic, what exactly is it based upon? 

The answer is that we rely on other noticeable factors about the information and its source to qualify what we listen to. These factors weigh into a selection mechanism that generally lies within our subconscious and is the deciding factor between the ideas that we hold. With this as our guide, perhaps it is time to retrospect about the origins of the ideas we hold and the faith in our own abilities to choose the correct perspectives.


# Diving In
Let's begin peeling the layers off this metaphorical onion and start with the first part that is easy to identify being the result of our selection method, which is a signal of the trustworthiness of the source. If a source is deemed to not be very trustworthy, then the resulting information and conclusions presented by the source have little impact on our acceptance of that perspective. In the case where we deem a source as completely unhinged, we may dismiss the view altogether and stop paying attention. Of course the opposite is true as well, which is that when we receive the indication that this source is trustworthy it opens up our ability to receive and process the information we hear into our understanding of our world. So if this mechanism ultimately generates an indication of trust, what are the origins of our trust? Our ability to trust is inherent to our human experience and is a very core essential skill to survival in our world. Children grow up with innate trust in their parents, their school teachers, and their best friends as a result of necessity in order to navigate the world and grow up safely. In other words, the trust in certain people and social groups begins as an unquestioned mechanism for which our very existence relies. As we mature other superficial characteristics inevitably weigh into our trust heuristic such as the way someone presents themselves, their charisma, or the common sensibility of their statements. Eventually as we reach the higher levels of our educational system we are introduced to the concept of performing conscious analysis of sources and their integrity, such as if they are a first party source or third party source. Eventually we may further specialize into a field of study where we are exposed to the highest levels of intellectual rigor and verification. With this as the typical progression for an individual, and noting the latter parts of the journey are only available to a subset of individuals who continue through education, it becomes obvious that trustworthiness is a function that reaches conscious levels only when extra care and focus is applied. Now we might ask ourselves, what consequences does this subconscious mechanism have compared with the more intellectual and conscious approach?

The most apparent benefit of consciously analyzing a source's credibility is the ability to deliberately choose the utilized trust factors. This choice allows for the inclusion of unbiased and rigorous trust factors which will more effectively result in a more accurate and well-rounded end product. The second benefit is that the consumer is aware of the path taken to choose their sources and perspectives and has a direct reference of reasoning when their conclusions come into question. If challenged on their perspectives, they are able to present their previous analysis of the media and the contents of that media as the item in question. This characteristic may seem incidental but in fact it directly correlates with our ability to separate ourselves from our ideas and in turn aids discussions with others. Individuals who disagree about a certain topic and have consciously understood their journey to arrive at their conclusions are able to compare the journeys themselves and search for the discrepancies that gave rise to the conclusion of perspectives. This deflection of focus from the individual to their journey allows the discussion to remain cordial even if impassioned, similar to how neighbors might discuss the different construction methods of a simple backyard project. While a particularly misguided journey may leave the owner feeling embarrassed as it is shown to be flawed, this is still not a direct personal attack.

Contrast this to the situation that arises when the subconscious trust factors are used to consume information and arrive at conclusions. Where does the individual point to when questioned about their belief? There was no conscious construction of the journey, so the spotlight cannot shift away from the individual. Suddenly and perhaps by surprise, the person themself is in the hot seat. As with any situation where we feel attacked and under question, a defensive mechanism naturally emerges which brings up barriers and decreases our chances of being open to new ideas. Certainly not helping the situation is that there is no actual content to discuss with the other individual who holds a separate belief since there was no conscious construction or reasoning of the idea to begin with. As a result, there is no shared ground for which both parties can work upon to discuss their positions. Interestingly enough, even when using trust factors that we are aware of, the lack of common ground may still occur. In the situation where poorly chosen trust factors are used, the resulting information may still have substantial bias and limited scope to the consumer. When two individuals who consume substantially different information meet with these misguided journeys, their sources of information may still be so biased that there is no commonality at all between their perspectives.

This lack of ability to identify even one point of shared common ground removes any present relatability between the individuals and delivers the only available conclusion, which is that their opinion is simply different. With no similarities, this forms a line in the sand that indicates those with shared perspectives and reasoning against those with different. As our perspectives narrow through subconscious or ill-chosen trust factors only two possible residencies can occur for further individuals we meet, which is to be placed into the "with me" bucket, or discarded to the "not with me" group. This grouping from an individual perspective enables the formation and acceptance of social groups that have clear borders since the dues of membership are simply subscriptions to commonly held beliefs. With our mainstream media options narrowing into persistent confirmation-bias echo chambers and our subconscious trust factors built from those we initially trusted for survival, is it such a surprise that these ideological groups are composed with a disproportionate distribution of culture, religion, geographical origin, race, and ethnicity?

Now that being said, there is a fair criticism about the situation posed above. In the distribution of society, some individuals just have gullible tendencies that enable these instinctive traits which cause themselves to. We've all met the unhinged maniac at one point or another who states farfetched views about the world as if they were self-evident. There will always be those types of people who jump to conclusions or journey down the conspiracy rabbit hole. Yet for the average citizen, it could be argued that exposure to proper education would curb those behaviors. Through training on proper intellectual rigor and the witnessing of cordjial debates, the average citizen will better learn how to move past their tempting instinctive human nature. Coupled with the decades often spent in educational institutions, the smart citizen will have a keen eye trained to recognize a reasoned perspective when confronted. However, is this assessment correct? Are we trained out of our instinctive biases through education?

## A Scientific Example
Enter Rick Cavallaro, the Chief Scientist at Sportvision and more notably a well knowledged physicist. In 2009 he published a blog about the concept for a vehicle that had a fan who's rotors were connected to the back axle. As the back wheels would turn, the belt would turn the fan and create force pushing the cart. It's a crazy looking vehicle, but it has an even more bizarre characteristic: When pushed by wind, it will actually maintain a speed greater than the wind.

When Rick published this concept, he thought other physicists would initially disagree but then see the light after being shown a proof. Instead, he received outrage. An overwhelming majority of physicists retorted that his contraption could never exceed the speed of the wind as that would clearly violate the law of conservation of energy. The feud became so intense that the Youtuber Veritasium was challenged to ten thousand dollars by a physics professor who claimed it was impossible. You can watch the videos yourself (linked at the end), but spoiler alert: While counterintuitive, this mechanism was proven from the start by the original physicist. Not proven in some evidence-based way, rather it was proven to be factually correct through the logical power of mathematics that underpins physics. Simply put, it was true.

The example may seem trivial but it reveals an important question: How did all of these physics experts fail to identify the factually correct answer even with their domain knowledge and mathematic tooling? The answer is they were tricked into bypassing first principles by their strong gut reaction, and possibly felt empowered to stand behind it due to their credentials. While the disagreement was not rooted in some innate childhood sense of trust, it was instead based on a physics principle taught by the educational system. If even experts can fall prey to subconscious biases that prescribe incorrect conclusions, the educated individual most definitely can as well. We may learn to look past the built-in trust factors given to us in childhood but our gut reactions will always be biased in some way, even through our education. Perhaps we are more inclined to believe the experts on TV because they sound, talk, and represent themselves like our professors did. The unsettling truth is that might have very little to do with the validity of their statements.

#  Personal Strategies
So with even the intellectually trained unable to rely on their inner trust factors to recognize valuable information, what are we to do outside of performing the grueling task of analyzing everything from first principles? Fortunately, there are a number of steps we can take that allow us to find comfort in a middle ground between becoming experts ourselves and blindly choosing perspectives.

### 1. Pick your trust factors
First and foremost, it is imperative to consciously choose and apply reliable trust factors when identifying your sources of information. While these criteria can be tailored to your preferences, start with media that has a long history of journalistic integrity. It's also important to analyze the type of media you consume and lean towards longer and more thorough content opposed to short videos or articles. Above all though, is just the importance of actually taking the time to think about the source of your information and the type of media you're consuming. Very few of us spare the effort to perform this analysis yet the reality is otherwise we succumb to our biased subconscious choosing for us.

### 2. Search for many different qualified sources
One source isn't going to cut it even if it passed your trust factors with flying colors. Every source has implicit bias and the only way to truly become aware of the majority of perspectives surrounding a topic is to go search many different sources that meet your selection criteria. While learning numerous perspectives surrounding a topic, you may encounter the inclination that certain perspectives have more merit than others. Recognize this instinctual alignment as your subconscious trust mecanim kicking in and abstain to the best of your ability from aligning heavily with any particular perspective initially. In addition to increasing your awareness of the perspectives surrounding a topic, this will increase your common ground from which you will be more able to relate with others in a discussion. Properly performed you will gain a broad awareness of the topic while mitigating instinctive defensiveness of a chosen opinion, thus providing a greater opportunity for meaningful conversation for others.

### 3. Focus on Essential Topics
While consuming media isn't as taxing as performing the actual underlying research, there is still a considerable amount of work to be done searching, qualifying, and consuming your information sources. A useful tactic to decrease workload is simply narrowing the scope of topics for which understanding is necessary. We are bombarded with new and often unsettling information from the news, our phones, our social groups and even our workplaces, but is it necessary to pay attention to them all? When confronting a new topic, begin with questioning the influence that topic has on your direct everyday life. Look around you and consider if anything in your surrounding world such as your next day at work or your relationship with your loved ones will change if left unengaged. Even if these are hot topics in your surrounding social or media groups, be willing to let go of your adherence to topics that ultimately have little impact on your daily being.

This is a particularly difficult area because we are so used to discussing large, complicated and seemingly important topics with others. It's almost second nature to talk about politics, economics, or the hot topic of the day at the lunch table. Further complicating the issue is that these topics themselves *are* important. However, their importance should be realized in relation to our direct everyday life. There is no doubt that the category of politics is an important function within our society, but unless your employment is directly related to the political industry, or your relative has been appointed to a governmental role, there's very little chance of it changing your day tomorrow. Rather, save your energy for topics that have a direct impact on your life from which additional awareness will be beneficial.

### 4. Compartmentalize decision making
Abstaining from controversial topics certainly sounds lovely and utopian, but what about times when a side must be chosen? In situations such as the voting booth, the best strategy is to recognize the scope of this decision. This choice does not carry the same weight as the person you choose to marry, and it isn't made with the accuracy of first principles possible in your area of expertise. In most cases, this choice is also necessary in the moment but does not need alignment indefinitely. So, feel comfortable making a decision at the booth. Choose your candidate based on the awareness gathered from your chosen sources and using your judgment in the moment while recognizing the relative importance of other decisions in your life. Remember that you are able to change your political position back to independence after voting, and perhaps its best to leave decisions there too.

### 5. Build situational awareness
It's easy enough to filter the information that we receive online or through the TV, but oftentimes misguided sources come from our physical or social environment that one cannot just disassociate from. Whether it's chatting with friends or at the office lunch table, remember that you can partake in the social experience of being with others without having to share their perspectives. Don't be goaded into contributing an unvetted perspective to the conversation just because of an implied social pressure to participate. In one-on-one situations we have more control over the conversation and when a topic arises that isn't productive we can easily change the conversation. Outside of social situations information inevitably finds its way to us through TVs in the doctors waiting room or more realistically through our devices. Recognize the urge to check the news when you're bored and perhaps just choose something for pure entertainment value.

Lastly, recognize when your instinctive defenses come up as the result of being challenged. Resist the natural temptation to argue the validity of your ideas and instead use the opportunity to reflect on why you may have come to that perspective in the first place. While it's uncomfortable, if the truth of a topic is more important than our feeling of being correct, encountering different perspectives is a wonderful learning opportunity when embraced.

# Final Thoughts
Now that we have a clearer understanding of how we automatically trust different sources, what does this mean for ourselves and how we engage with society?

At first it can feel disheartening to realize how riddled with bias our own internal mechanisms are and surprising that we've never spent time addressing how we come to believe the ideas we hold. In certain ways, it's similar to other habits that have the tendency to sneak up on us: We may not realize the consequences of eating poorly until we find ourselves surprised on the scale. Through daily discipline we have the ability to influence our being through the small choices we make every single day. Unlike the consequences of poor food habits, the sacrifices that are made when poorly consuming information have implications beyond ourselves.

Polarization in this country is easy to conceptualize as an external force that is out of our control, but what we've seen is that the origin of division begins within ourselves. It is constructed through the temptation to believe information without question and emboldened by the lack of will to search and learn about other perspectives. It is the protection of our ego and our urge to be right which removes our capacity to relate with other human beings.

Fortunately we also have the capacity to pursue self awareness and dampen our natural defenses. Next time you encounter a different perspective, take a moment and consider if the belief you hold is truly more grounded. If we all take a moment to retrospect, perhaps we'd find that the origins of our differences are not rooted in so much beyond our gut instincts. Thanks for reading.
