---
title: "The Responsible Bystander"
description: "How a new approach to being a bystander can help reinvergerate normal discourse again"
layout: post
toc: false
comments: true
hide: true
search_exclude: true
categories: []
metadata_key1: metadata_value1
metadata_key2: metadata_value2
---

# Attempt 1
It's the night of November 8th, 2016, and millions of Americans are tuned into their media to witness the results of the 45th electoral compaign for presidency. Many had gone out earlier that day to the voting booths to cast their votes for their candidate of choice, most placing their vote between either the Republican nomine Donald Trump and the Democrat nomine Hillary Clinton. To the horror of many and the joy of just as many if not more, Donald Trump ended up running away with the election. And while half the voters celebrated and half grieved, we all couldn't help but wonder why these were the primary candidates up for election. Aren't there certainly better quallified candidates to be the leader of the United States of America? While that is true, I couldn't help but ask a deeper question that turned the spotlight back on ourselves and forced introspection: If we collectively thought the two top nominees were awful, why did they get 94% of the presidential votes?

Analyzing our decisions during the election requires us to become more introspective about the nature of human's decision making process, and how we reside with the conclusions and opinions of the world that we hold. To start, how are we supposed to decide which candidate we support? The intellectual and rational approach taught to us in school is to think for ourselves and construct our own hypothetical policies for which the nation could run. Then after we perform our own thinking, we survey the available candidates from the numerous political parties and align our vote for the candidate whos perspectives and views most closely match our own. That's what we should do in theory, at least. Realistically we all know that very rarely is this the way we actually vote, because to expect an individual who is juggling the complexities of every day life to additionally have the time to become well studyied in politics is unreasonable. So if not through our own thinking do we reach a decision, by which mechanism are we reaching a decision when we vote at the polling booth? And perhaps more importantly, how did this mechanism allow 94% of votes to go to choices that we deemed awful?

Without using first principle analysis to reach our own conclusions, the only remaining choice if we wish to have a perspective is to pick from the perspectives available in our media. This is what I deem the "shopping" method, where instead of procuring our own ideas, we simply select an idea that we prefer from the available opinions online, not much different from the way we choose which apple to take home from the bucket at the market. The shopping approach gives us a quick and easy way to find ideas, conclusions, and choices about the world around us.

# Attempt 2
The 2016 election was remarkable in so many ways, but certainly in that the two mainstream candidates were despised by so many Americans. Many of us rightfully asked ourselves how Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton become the front-runners in our presidential race. While there are important questions surrounding the process by which the candidates get selected and nominated in their respective political parties, I wanted to ask a deeper and more introspective question: If these candidates were so despised, how did they receive 94% of the votes for president? There must be some disconnect here between the goals of the citizen to pick a worthy candidate, and the actual decision making process used to select a candidate. 

So, how should we select a candidate? The intellectual and rational approach taught to us in school is to think for ourselves and construct our own hypothetical policies for which the nation could run. Then after we perform our own thinking, we survey the available candidates from the numerous political parties and align our vote for the candidate whos perspectives and views most closely match our own. That's what we should do in theory, at least. Realistically we all know that very rarely is this the way we actually vote, because to expect an individual who is juggling the complexities of every day life to additionally have the time to become well studyied in politics is unreasonable. So if not through our own thinking do we reach a decision, by which mechanism are we reaching a decision when we vote at the polling booth? And perhaps more importantly, how did this mechanism allow 94% of votes to go to choices that we deemed awful?

# Attempt 3
More responsible consumers source media that is known to minimize bias and perform thurough examinations of the topic, but most consumers don't maintain this standard and simply pick up news and perspectives through one-sided simplified content such as short articles or videos. While it may be a stretch to directly relate the current polarization within our country to the poor media habits of consumers, let's explore what implications we are able to derive from these habits and strategies to mitigate the more negative affects.

Without the time and resources to produce our own understanding of a topic from the ground up, individuals resort to the typical behavior of a consumer: shopping. They rely on perspectives presented to them through various online articles, videos, radio shows or podcast conversation, and over time will align themselves with the perspectives that they prefer. An interesting question to ask ourselves is that if the consumer isn't using rational analysis of the underlying topic to determine which perspectives they align with, what mechanism are they using? Consumers must use some other factor as a heuristic when determining the perspective that they subscribe to. Every consumer may have a slightly different set of underlying factors, but ultimately they congregate into what functions as a trustworthiness indicator. The more subjective trustworthy factors that a media source has, the higher likelihood that the consumer is going to align with the perspectives and conclusions presented from that media.


So what are these trust factors you may ask? Well on one side of the spectrum you have the more responsible media consumer who is using factors such as a history of journalistic integrity to select the media they consume. In the case of the media consumer with poor habits, they are certainly not using such high standards to identify trustworthy media. in fact, it's difficult to say exactly what the poor media consumer is really using to determine which media they find more inherently trustworhty, becuase it's often times not a concious activity. Trust factors could range widely from the way that someone articulates themselves, the culture someone represents, or just the persuasiveness of their presentation. 


- - -
To begin, let's break down exactly how we come to align with certain views and perspectives about the world. The first and typically unused approach is the tedious journey of researching the foundations of a topic and analyzing multiple perspetives ourselves from first principles to reach a perspective constructed from our own understanding. More realistically, without infinite time and resources, we search for media sources that provide these perspectives to us. I call this the "shopping" method, where instead of doing our own thinking to reach a conclusion, we rely on the perspectives presented to us through various online articles, videos, radio shows or podcast conversation. Shopping relies on going to a market, and in the current media climate the market can relate to either media organizations such as BBC or social media websites with user uploaded content. Not all markets are the same of course, and with media platforms being known for bias and attention seeking algorithms that create echo chambers it's important for the consumer to become exposed to different perspectives. Still, a critical question to ask ourselves is if we aren't thinking through the argument ourselves, what method are we using to base our decision on which perspective to subscribe to?



** EDIT: describe trust factors before the subconcious piece
It's tricky to isolate exactly which mechanism or reason we use over time to align with certain perspectives, but it's fair to assume that most often it's a subconcious alignment done over time with multiple exposure to similiar perspectives. Rarely do we listen to a podcast that has a new perspective and we react saying "Yes, this is what I believe now!". However it's undeniable that we do form beliefs about our surrounding world through the media and perspectives that we are exposed to. The question is, if this alignment is done without concious awareness, how do we align with certain perspectives over others? While it's difficult to put a finger on the exact mechanism, it's fair to say that our subconcious is picking up and judging different characteristics about the media source that we use to determine trustworthiness and our willingness to hold on or dismiss the views presented by that media source. These "trust factors" could range from more widely accepted indications of trust such as institutionally recognized credentials, to individual preferences the consumer has such as the way a presenter articuates themselves, their cultural background, other ideas they may hold, or simply the persuasiveness by which they lay out their arguments. Where do these individual consumer preferences come from? Considering they're subcioncoius it's difficult to say with any degree of certainty, but a safe bet is that these preferred trust factors reside in our past experiences and what we've witnessed to be worthy sources of information in the past.

The direct implication that subconcious alignment has is that it removes the ability for us to recognize the origins of the ideas that we hold. When we conciously construct an argument through logical analysis, we have a breadcrumb trail to reference when identifying the creation of our perspectives. When our opinions are 

# Attempt 4 (the actual article)
In my previous article, we analyzed the relationship of podcast experts and the consumers who listen to them. The conclusion of the article led us to realize that while it's human nature to seek explanations about the world around us, we simply don't have the time and resources to become experts in these topics and think through to our own conclusions from scratch. As a result, we source information through consumer media or our social groups to provide us context and perspective to help us understand what is going on in our world. While we intuitively understand that shifting from being a producer to a consumer of perspectives isn't the most precise approach, certainly we have the intellectual capacity to identify a valuable perspective when we hear one. Or put another way, surely we will be able to navigate through the complicated mess of available opinions and emerge with similiar if not the same perspective had we done so by our own efforts. Yet if our value judgement for a chosen perspective does not rely upon the underlying fundamentals of a topic, what exactly is it based upon? How do we choose which ideas we subscribe to and which we dismiss without doing the analysis ourselves? Perhaps it is time to retrospect about the inherent trust we have in our own abilities to identify sources of trustworthy information, and from which we may descern the sacrifices to ourselves and our society that are made when placing unreasonable faith in this mechanism.

# Setting the Stage
So what constitutes this internal mechanism which does the vital function of selecting which information we accept and which to dismiss? Let's begin by peeling the layers off this metaphorical onion and start with the first part that is easy to identify being the result of this mechanims, which is a signal of the trustworthiness of the source. If a source is deemed to not be very trustworthy, then the resulting information and conclusions presented by the source have little impact on our acceptance of that perspective. In the case where we deem a source as completely unhinged, we may dismiss the view altogether and stop paying attention. Of course the opposite is true as well, which is that when we receive the indication that this source is trustworthy it opens up our ability to receive and process the information we hear into our understanding of our world. So if this mechanism ultimately generates an indication of trust, what are the origins of our trust? Our ability to trust is inherent to our human experience and is a very core essential skill to survival in our world. Children grow up with innate trust in their parents, their school teachers, and their best friends as a result of necessity in order to navigate the world and grow up safely. In other words, the trust in certain people and social groups begins as an unquestioned mechanism for which our very existence relies on. As we mature other superficial characteristics inevitably weigh into our trust heuristic such as the way someone presents themselves, their charisma, or the common sensibility of their statements. Eventually as we reach the higher levels of our educational system we are introduced to the concept of performing concious analysis of a sources and their integrity, such as if they are a first party source or third party source. Eventually we may further specialize into a field of study where we are exposed to the highest levels of intellectual rigour and verification. With this as the typical progression for an individual, and noting the latter parts of the journey are only available to a subset of individuals who continue through education, it becomes obvious that trustworthiness is a function that reaches conscious levels only when extra care and focus is applied. Now we might ask ourselves, what consequences does this subconscious mechanism have compared with the more intellectual and conscious approach?

The most apparent benefit of consciously analyzing a source's credibility is the ability to deliberately chooose the utilized trust factors. This choice allows for the inclusion of non-biased and rigorous trust factors which will more effectively result in a more accurate and well-rounded end product. The second benefit is that the consumer is aware of the path taken to choose their sources and perspectives and has a direct reference of reasoning when their conclusions come into question. If challenged on their perspectives, they are able to present their previous analysis of the media and the contents of that media as the item in question. This characteristic may seem incedental but in fact it directly coorelates with our ability to separate ourselves from our ideas and in turn aids discussions with others. Individuals who disagree about a certain topic and have consciously understood their journey to arrive at their conclusions are able to compare the journeys themselves and search for the discrepencies that gave rise to the conclusion of perspectives. This deflection of focus from the individual to their journey allows the discussion to remain cordjial even if impassioned, similiar to how neighbors might discuss the different construction methods of a simple backyard project. While a particularly misguided journey may leave the owner feeling embarassed as it is shown to be flawed, this is still not a direct personal attack.

Contrast this to the situation that arrises when the subconscious trust factors are used to consume information and arrive at conclusions. Where does the indivdual point to when questioned about their belief? There was no conscious construction of the journey, so the spotlight cannot shift away from the individual. Suddenly and perhaps by surprise, the person themself is in the hotseat. As with any situation where we feel attacked and under question, a defensive mechanism naturally emerges which brings up barriers and decreases our chances of being open to new ideas. Certainly not helping the situation is that there is no actual content to discuss with the other individual who holds a separate belief since there was no conscious construction or reasoning of the idea to begin with. As a result, there is no shared ground for which both parties can work upon to discuss their positions. Interestingly enough, even when using trust factors that we are aware of, the lack of common ground may still occur. In the situation where poorly chosen trust factors are used, the resulting information may still have substaintial bias and limited scope to the consumer. When two individuals who consumed substaintially different information meet with these misguided journeys, their sources of information may still be so biased that there is no commonality at all between their perspectives.

This lack of ability to identify even one point of shared common ground removes any present relatability between the individuals and delivers the only available conclusion, which is that their opinion is simply different. With no similiaries, this forms a line in the sand that indicates those with shared perspectives and reasoning against to those with different. As our perpsectives narrow through subconscious or illchosen trust factors only two possible residencies can occur for further individuals we meet, which is to be placed into the "with me" bucket, or discarded to the "not with me" group. This grouping from an individual perspective enables the formation and acceptance of social groups that have clear borders since the dues of membership are simply subscriptions to commonly held beliefs. With our mainstream media options narrowing into persistent confirmation-bias echochambers and our subconscious trust factors built from those we initially trusted for survival, is it such a suprise that these ideological groups are composed with a disproportionate distrubution of culture, religion, geogrpahical origin, race, and ethnicity?

Now that being said, there is a fair criticism about the situation posed above. In the distrubution of society, some individuals just have gullible tendancies that enable these instinctive traits which cause thmselves to. We've all met the unhinged maniac at one point or another who states farfetched views about the world as if they were self-evident. There will always be those types of people who jump to conclusions or journey down the conspriracy rabbit hole. Yet for the average citizen, it could be argued that exposure to proper education would curb those behaviors. Through training on proper intellectual rigor and the witnessing of cordjial debates, the average citizen will better learn how to move past their tempting instinctive human nature. Coupled with the decades often spent in educational institutions, the smart citizen will have a keen eye trained to recognize a reasoned perspective when confronted. However, is this assessment correct? Are we trained out of our instinctive biases through education?

Enter Rick Cavallaro, the Chief Scientist at Sportvision. In 2009 he published a blog about the concept for a vehicle that had a fan whos roters were conneted to the back axel. As the back wheels would turn, the belt would turn the fan and create force pushing the cart. It's a crazy looking vehicle, but it has an even more bizzare characteristic: When pushed by wind, its speed will actually exceed and maintain a speed greater than the wind. 

When <> published this, he thought he would get some laughs and perhaps some comical comments from his audience of physicists at the bizzarenes of this contraption. Instead, he received outrage at the ridiculous proposal he had made. An overwhelming majority of physycicts retorted that his contraption could never exceed the speed of the wind as that would clearly violate a core tenant of physics, being the law of conversation of energy. The feud became so intense that the Youtuber Veritasium was challenged ten thousand dollars by physycist who claimed it was impossible. You can watch the videos yourself (linked at the end), but spoiler alert: while it is definitely counterintuitive, this mechanism was proven from the start by the original physicist. Furthermore this was not proven in some evidence-based way, rather it was proven to be factually correct through the logical power of mathematics that underpins physics. Simply put, it was true. 

An interesting question arrises from this particular situation which is how all these instituionally recognized experts in this domain of knowledge couldn't come to the factual conclusion about a topic in the very area that they were experts in? The answer is simple, which is that they did not perform an analysis from first principles, which they were certainly qualified to do. Rather, they believed that they were entitled to trusting the shortcut of common sense because surely they would know better, since they were experts. This demonstrates that even experts can fall victim to subconscious biases that prescribe certain conclusions without conscious analysis. Although one could argue it's better as they did not disagree with this perspective due to some inherent childhood distrust of his being, but they still defaulted to a faulty trust mechanism. And if experts can fall prey to these subconscious psycological shortcuts, certainly the educated individual can as well. While we may learn to look past the built-in trust factors given to us in childhood, we may have picked up others through the educational system. Perhaps we are more inclined to believe that expert on the podcast because they sound, talk, and represent themselves like an expert should. The unsettling truth is that might have very little to do with the validity of their statements.

##  Takeaways
So with even the intellectually trained unable to rely on their inner trust factors to recognize valuable information, what are we to do outside of performing the grueling task of analyzing everything from first principles? Fortuantely, there are a number of steps we can take that allow us to find comfort in a middle ground between becoming experts ourselves and blindly choosing perspectives.

1. Pick your trust factors
First and foremost, it is imperative to consciously choose and apply reliable trust factors when identifying your sources of information. While these critieria can be tailored to your preferences, start with media that has a long history of journalistic integrity. It's also important to analyze the type of media you consume and lean towards longer and more thurough content opposed to short videos or articles. Above all though, is just the importance of actually taking the time to think about the source of your information and the type of media you're consuming. Very few of us spare the effort to perform this analysis yet the reality is otherwise we succumb to our biased subconcious choosing for us. **doing it at all is leaps and bounds more effective than defaulting to our faulty subcionscious mechanismsm.**

2. Search for many different qualified sources
One source isn't going to cut it even if it passed your trust factors with flying colors. Every source has implicit bias and the only way to truly become aware of the majority of perspectives surrounding a topic is to go search many different sources that meet your selection criteria. While learning numerous perpsectives surrounding a topic, you may encounter the inclination that certain perspectives have more merit than others. Recognize this instinctual alignment as your subconsious trust mechanim kicking in and abstain to the best of your ability from aligning heavily with any particular perspective initially. In addition to increasing your awareness of the perspectives surrounding a topic, this will increase your common ground from which you will be more able to relate with others in a discussion. Properly performed you will gain a broad awareness of the topic while mitigating instinctive defensiveness of a chosen opinion, thus providing a greater opportunity for meaningful conversation for others.

3. Focus on Essential Topics
While consuming media isn't as taxing as performing the actual underlying research, there is still a considerable amount of work to be done searching, qualifying, and consuming your information sources. A useful tactic to decrease workload is simply narrowing the scope of topics for which understanding is necessary. We are bomboarded with new and often unsettling information from the news, our phones, our social groups and even our workplaces, but is it necessary to pay attention to them all? When confronting a new concerning topic begin with questioning the influence that topic has on your direct everyday life. Look around you and consider if anything in your surrounding world such as your next day at work or your relationship with your loved ones will change if left unengaged. Even if these are hot topics in your surrounding social or media groups, be willing to let go of your adherance to topics that ultimately have little impact on your daily being.

This is a particularly difficult area because we are so used to discussing large, complicated and seemingly important topics with others. It's almost second nature to talk about politics, economics, or the hot topic of the day at the lunch table. Further complicating the issue is that these topics themselves *are* important. However, their importance should be realized in relation to our direct everyday life. There is no doubt that the category of politics is an important function within our society, but unless your employement is directly related to the political industry, or your relative has been appointed to a governmental role, there's very little chance of it changing your day tomorrow. Rather, save your energy for topics that have a direct impact on your life from which additional awareness will be benefitial.

4. Compartamentalize decision making
Abstaining from controversial topics certainly sounds lovely and utopian, but what about times when a side must be chosen? In situations such as the voting booth, the best strategy is to recognize the scope of this decision. This choice does not carry the same weight as the person you choose to marry, and it isn't made with the accuracy of first principles possible in your area of expertise. In most cases, this choice is also necessary in the moment but does not need alignment indefinitely. So, feel comfortable making a decision at the booth. Choose your candidate based on the awareness gathered from your chosen sources and using your judgement in the moment while recognizing the relative importance to other decisions in your life. Remember that you are able to change your political position back to independent after voting, and perhaps its best leave decisions there too.

5. Build situational awareness
It's easy enough to filter the information that we receive online or through the TV, but often times misguided sources come from our physical or social envirnoment that one cannot just disassociate from. Whether it's chatting with friends or at the office lunch table, remember that you can partake in the social experience of being with others without having to share their perspectives. Don't be goaded into contributing an unvetted perspective to the conversation just because of an implied social pressure to participate. In one-on-one situations we have more control over the conversation and when a topic arrises that isn't productive we can easily change the conversation. Outside of social situations information inevitably finds its way to us through TVs in the doctors waiting room or more realistically through our devices. Recognize the urge to check the news when you're bored and perhaps just choose something for pure entertainment value.

Lastly, recognize when your instinctive defenses come up as the result to being challenged. Resist the natural temptation to argue the validity of your ideas and instead use the opportunity to reflect on why you may have come to that perspective in the first place. While it's uncomfortable, if the truth of a topic is more important than our feeling of being correct, encountering different perspectives is a wonderful learning opportunity when embraced.
# Broader Implications
Now that we have a clearer understanding of how we autoamticaly trust difference sources, what does this mean for ourselves and how we engage with society? 

At first it can feel disheartening to realize how riddled with bias our own internal mechanisms are and surprising that we've never spent time addressing how we come to believe the ideas we hold. In certain ways, it's similiar to other habits that have the tendancy to sneak up on us: We may not realize the consequences of eating poorly until we find ourself surprised on the scale. Through daily discipline we have the ability to influence our being through the small choices we make every single day. Unlike the consequences of poor food habits, the sacrifices that are made when poorly consuming information have implications beyond ourselves.

Polarization in this country is easy to conceptualize as an external force that is out of our control, but what we've seen is that the origin of division begins within ourselves. It is constructed through the temptation to believe information without question and emboldened by the lack of will to search and learn about other perspectives. It is the protection of our ego and our urge to be right which removes our capacity to relate with other human beings. 

Fortunately we also have the capacity to persue self awareness and dampen our natural defenses. Next time you encounter a different perspective, take a moment and consider if the belief you hold is truly more grounded. If we all take a moment to retrospect, perhaps we'd find that the origins of our differences are not rooted in so much beyond our gut instincts. Thanks for reading.

While it is important to let that realization settle in, we would be remiss to overlook the positive implications and where we can be extremely strong and confident in ourselves. When we apply concsious effort to understanding a topic we are able to 

- Coming back to the beginning, what does this mean for ourselves and how we engage with society?
- Unsettling to realize how riddled with bias our automatic sourcing mechanisms are. 
- It's also surprising that we've never really thought about this before, yet we hold many loaded perspectives ourselves
- Alternatively though, it shows us where we are strong.When we apply concscious effort, we are strong when we apply effort to our own understanding of things, whether that's through sources, or through our own understanding from first principles.

- Coorelary with basic and routine discipline, eating well, excercising, etc
- We can take the more responsible path or the lazy and natural path.
- If we trust our subconscious mechanism, we might be more tempted to eat a dense meal than the more appropriate salad
- This concept is not new... the tale of the two wolves.
- But in this situation, the outcome of the badwolf has implications on others.

- We may see division and polorization in this country as some external force in the ether, something that we can't grasp and something we don't control
- But as we've unconvered, 
- It's constructed from the misguided temptation to jump to conclusions when we aren't sure how we know. 
- It's the protection of our ego and our urge to be right instead of seek different perspectives in the name of truth

- So be confide



So, do we really expect members of society to really follow all of those rules and become responsible consumers of information? It's a tall order, that's for sure. But recognize that the intellectual discipline just explored is constructed through the small battles that we face everyday, not some monumental decision that only the most worthy of us are able to bear. It's through the willingness to refrain ourselves from the human tendency to need an answer and our ego which tells us that our answer needs to be right from which we can become more responsible citizens, friends, and neighbors. 



**the lack of adherance to a perspective will decrease your defensive response.**

**To the best of your ability, withhold alignment to any particular perspective as you have still not verified the underlying argument yourself and you will remain more open to changing perspectives when challenged or when new information arrises.**

# I'd like to think I'm not that stupid
**With our faith in our ability to recognize a good perspective completely shattered, what are our remaining options?**
With all that said and now having a better understanding of our underlying trustworthy mechanism, what are we able to take away from this? **What actions can we take to avoid falling back onto our subconscious habits which may innocuously lead us down a treacherous path?**


---

Let's begin by analyzing the experience of using aware conscious thought rather than subconcious. When we analyze a subject through deliberate rational thought and construct an argument based on that journey, we are left with a direct reference we can point to when questioned about our conclusions. If someone disagress with our perspectives, we are able to retreat  through the breadcrumb trail of previous thought and identify the point of divergance between the different conclusions. In the case where the perspectives that we hold resulted from the subconscious trustworthy mechanism, our reference to a chain of thought is nowhere to be found. When questioned about the origins behind our perspective, the reasons for why we aligned with a particular perspective appear a mystery to us. In this situation, the spotlight cannot be shifted away from ourselves to an external source of reasoning. Rather, we are in the spotlight.

This is an uncomfortable place to be, yet the consequences go beyond the normal situational discomfort of being caught emptyhanded. 

result of being in the spotlight ourselves has a direct affect on our ability to manipulate and discuss our ideas with others. When all interested parties can reference the trail of thought directly it allows for collaboration, similiar to how two homeowners might discuss a simple backyard project. When disagreeances occur, 



The responsible consumer would say that this conundrum has an easy answer - simply build a list of qualifying factors that judge a source's credebility and spend time analyzing the sources prior to digesting the information. This approach is certainly possible and in fact it's what was pointed out in our previous discussion as guiding factors that a responsible consumer can use when identifying a credible source. However, most individuals when consuming information either do not have this luxury of premeditated analysis or simply do not choose to do so when observing media. The reasons for this can vary, but it surely is an easy task to accomidate for in hindsight and one that is not very practical in the every day life of consumers. Ever since we were children we have been bombarded with information about the world from our parents, friends, cultural figures, religious institutions, media sources through radio, TV, or the internet, and we were never instructed to forgo the information without proper analysis of the source's credibility. **Only when we become young adults and we go through educational institutions that force to us to perform concious analysis of sources' integrity do we understand the intellectual process by which selecting credible sources is done**. Even with that education, humans cannot escape the sea of opinions about the world around us due to the social groups and the certain degree of unescapable media presence around us. It's no surprise that with this inudation of information and the very rare indication to us that we should be considering the factors of trust prior to absorbing that information, that we rarely do this. The average consumer, even consumers that are institutionally recognized with some essence of intellectual achievement as we will see an example of later, often fall into the trap of sidestepping the analysis of a sources' credibility. 