---
title: "Book Review: Man's Search For Meaning"
description: "A critique of Viktor's psychological account of the inmate's experience during their encampment."
layout: post
toc: false
comments: true
hide: false
search_exclude: false
categories: []
metadata_key1: metadata_value1
metadata_key2: metadata_value2
---

# Background
Man’s Search for Meaning by Viktor E. Frankl is an account of his personal experience surviving the concentration camps during WWII. Before the war, Viktor was a doctor who studying psychology, and had a particular interest in a theory of psychology which was known as “Logotherapy”. This theory suggests that man’s drive is to find and live his purpose, as opposed to other theories which suggest that humans simply operate according to their worldly input and outputs. 
While in the concentration camps, Viktor observed the mental condition of himself and the men surrounding him. He later detailed these observations along with his key experiences in the camps in the first section of the book. Alongside these observations are conclusions drawn about the inner state, motivations, and thoughts of the other men in the camps. From these, Viktor draws conclusions surrounding what mental states most helped a prisoner endure the camps, the most notable of which for Viktor is their internal connection with a greater purpose.

# The two groups of prisoners
Throughout Viktor’s account, he makes an attempt to recognize prisoners of being within two distinct categories: Those who act in the interest of their own personal survival, and those who uphold some internal ethical standard. Viktor states it more abstractly, with “the “race” of the decent man and the “race” of the indecent man.”
It’s understandable why in such a dire survival situation, where your loved ones have likely perished and all resemblance of your previous life erased, why self-preservation would be the prevailing behavior. However, Viktor was not so kind as to describe these prisoners as making the wisest decision. In normal society, lying and betraying others for the benefit of oneself would be seen negatively, and Viktor upholds this belief even in the camp as to state that “We who have come back ... know: the best of us did not return.”  His perspective was that to choose these behaviors meant to become a “plaything of circumstance” and to “forget his human dignity”, which then destined the prisoner to “become no more than an animal”. This is the “typical inmate” that Viktor observes in the camps.
The second group of men are described in a variety of ways, not all consistent with each other. In accordance with the psychological theme of the book, most of these men had some internal purpose to keep them going. Sometimes the purpose was simply the remembrance and thought of one’s wife and hoping to see her. Other times it was a piece of work yet to be done that one valued as important to their career. It may be described in a more immediate and practical manner such as saving a piece of bread for a more impactful time than the present. Regardless, all men in the second category did not act in accordance solely with their immediate survival instincts, but through another layer of decision making that was internal to their being.

## Criticisms 
Initially Viktor attempts to recognize what mental tools a prisoner used to better their situation. I find value in these observations, however I disagree with the use of these observations to further categorize these men into the two aforementioned categories.
First, Viktor himself provides contradictions within his account that show the categorization is not so clear-cut. When describing a situation where the prisoners must give up a man guilty of theft or else “the whole camp would starve for a day”, Viktor states the conclusion as “Naturally, the 2,500 men preferred to fast.” Certainly if the ”typical inmate” acted solely with self-preservation in mind, the majority rule would have been to give up the single prisoner so that nobody had to fast for a day. Further, Viktor himself states that the behavior was natural, suggesting that even he thought the default behavior of the group would be general sacrifice on behalf of the individual. In a more direct contradiction, he states elsewhere that judgment against the man acting in self-preservation is not reasonable, for who can judge a prisoner “under circumstances when ... it is a question of life or death”. Yet Viktor does judge these men, shown in his statement where “the best of us did not return“.
A second point of disagreement arises from the common behaviors that constitute a placement into the more esteemed grouping, and the method by which Viktor observed these behaviors. During a particularly icy and desolate march, Viktor utilizes the memory of his wife for encouragement and assumes he is accompanied by the man next to him, although “nothing was said, but we both knew: each of us was thinking of his wife”. If simply reminiscing on a loved-one was enough to place a man into the esteemed category, is it not unreasonable to believe that most men were doing this at some point to endure their suffering? Further, this example highlights a gap in Viktor’s observations on the other prisoner’s internal state: they never directly told him. Viktor’s account of the other prisoners internal motivations are instead his sole estimation as based on their outwardly behavior. Therefor it is certainly plausible that more men than Viktor accounted for did use  forms of internal motivation to endure, and Viktor simply did not know.

## Takeaways
While I do disagree with the specific prisoner categories that Viktor concludes, I believe that there is a valuable commonality between all of the men who were observed to be in the esteemed group. Each man chose to place their focus on an internal state that they themselves cultivated, and did not solely exist within the confines of their immediate circumstances. Put more directly, they chose to maintain an attitude irrespective of the suffering that surrounded them. 
The beauty of Viktor’s account is that it articulately expresses the ability to choose one’s attitude, which was highlighted as being the only remaining free decision available to the prisoners. Due to the context of Viktor’s situation, the lesson to the reader may appear as to maintain a positive attitude in difficult times. While that is certainly a worthwhile application, the grander lesson is to understand that the choice of maintaining an attitude exists at all times throughout all circumstances, even when there is plenty more freedom of choice in our daily activities. 
As Viktor explains: “There is also purpose in that life which is almost barren of both creation and enjoyment and which admits of but one possibility of high moral behavior: namely, in man’s attitude to his existence, an existence restricted by external forces.” Surely if man has the choice of attitude when there is nothing left, he has a choice of attitude when he has everything.

# Utility of a Future Vision
In Viktor’s account, he discusses the use of an imagined futuristic state as an essential mental tool which kept the prisoners engaged in their survival. Summarized generally, Viktor says that someone who could not see an end to their current situation “ceased living for the future”, and “forms of decay set in”. Interestingly, he also mentions situations where the future vision harmed the individual once they reached the said future state. Therefor, a question to ask oneself is what the true value of the future visions was.
Viktor describes an inmate who had a prophecy in his dream that in a months time, they would be liberated from the camp. When the day came and the prophecy was not fulfilled, “he became delirious and lost consciousness. The next day, he was dead.” After liberation when Viktor was observing his comrades, he mentions “Woe to him ... who found it so different from all he had longed for”, for some prisoners went home “and pressed the bell ... only to find the person who should open the door was not there, and would never be there again.” What does one do when the goal that should provide us certain happiness fails to deliver once we get there? As he solemnly observes, “we were not prepared for unhappiness”.
First, and certainly most important for the prisoners, was that the future vision provided motivation during the difficult times in the camp. This itself is a benefit regardless of the outcome once the vision is achieved. Then there is the question of whether or not the future vision was realistic. In the case of the prophecy, it’s easy to see that the vision was certainly not realistic and aligning with such a contrived notion was hopeful at best. However, one must also ask the question of whether a realistic future vision would have had the sufficient motivation in the current moment. The inmates certainly knew that most women and children were immediately killed. If they truly assessed their future vision with proportionality to the chances of their loves ones being alive, would it have helped? 
A pragmatic question for the reader is whether or not the practice of a future vision is applicable in our regular lives. Certainly it is understandable how it can be helpful when enduring difficult times, but is it similarly helpful within the natural ebbs and flows of daily life? This is most likely a question that each reader will have to answer themselves, however I estimate that there is some form of a future vision that may help us in even normal circumstances. Without further hypothesizing, I’ll leave it there.

# Minor Themes
## Learned Helplessness
There are examples within VIktor’s account that support the more modern concept of Learned Helplessness, which is generally defined as an individual adapting their behavior to never try an activity again if they previously failed only few times.
When describing the inmate’s perspective on life outside the camps, he mentions that “anything outside the barbed wire became remote - out of reach and, in a way, unreal”. The outside world became so far removed that the prisoner was unable to associate with it anymore, insofar that it was viewed “as it might to have to a dead man, who looked at it from another world”. 
When they were liberated, they still were unable to initially process the change that had occurred. “We had literally lost the ability to feel pleased and had to relearn it slowly”. 
One thought I had that tied in the utility of the future vision, was if the vision was a tool to fight against the learned helplessness. Perhaps the vision, with its unrealistic hubris, was needed to avoid succumbing to the natural decay of individual liberty when existing in circumstances that would let learned helplessness set in.

## Looking to the Past
The account provides good examples of how looking to the past can be either positive or negative, depending on the context. During one of the icy marches in the winter, he describes using the memory of his wife as motivation to get through. However elsewhere in the camp he describes his belief for how escaping the harsh reality of their circumstances through reminiscing caused the prisoners to overlook “opportunities to make something positive of camp life, opportunities which really did exist”. 
I certainly think that concept is applicable to everyday life, in that if we escape our reality with consumption or entertainment, we divert our attention to the more presently (and perhaps more boring) available opportunities in our environment.
